That's a hope for the future, really.
That's probably a perfect place to start.
Because you're observing your 90th year.
Your first book of volume of poetry was published 65 years ago.
That's right.
It amazes even me.
So you really have not only lived through
virtually the entire century, I mean, with the exception of the first five years, but you've written poetry through seven decades, I guess it is, 65 years.
Here we are approaching the end of not only the century, but the millennium.
What do you think?
What do you see for poetry as we approach the next millennium?
So many people feel that poetry really isn't relevant anymore.
We don't agree, but address yourself to that.
You cannot talk about poetry without talking about the state of our culture.
And there's a curious hostility in certain quarters to...
literature which is identified with liberalism and the whole tradition of individual pride and achievement as opposed to
and opinion as opposed to the uniformity of a culture that the modern state has more or less made as a condition of our existence.
I don't know whether I've said that.
It's fine.
I'm just looking at my notes.
You can modify and put them to English.
I guess it does concern me with what is... I guess I'm driving it, and I hate to offer such a question, but the relevance of the poet.
You have not lost any faith in the relevance of poetry.
How can I...
lose faith in the noblest exercise of the human imagination, the human spirit.
If civilization is to survive at all as a continuity of the great peaks of human understanding, love and
achievement, then poetry must always be honored and read as well as written.
We know there will always be somebody to write poetry.
It's another question.
Who is going to read it?
I saw your Bill Moyers interview, and I read it back, and I interviewed Bill Moyers out in Chicago at the ABA, and that was such a wonderful... It's so gratifying to see this resurgence of poetry, isn't it?
That's so grateful.
Now we're coming to something that I think is very important, and which the academics, of course, deplore.
They deplore this?
Deplore, yes.
Well, what offends the academicians is that poetry is welling up on the fringes of our society.
It is no longer the sole property of the academy.
There it is in little cafes, in bars.
It is a testimony to the hunger of other people for the spoken word.
The spoken word, but which is also... Is poetry fundamentally, do you believe, meant to be read aloud?
It's the best poetry...
root, that is its absolute central sustenance, is the voice itself.
And it cannot be separated from it.
And so when you are creating poetry, do you speak it aloud?
That's the way I write my poems.
I don't write them, I speak them.
And they take shape first?
They take shape as a sound, as much as anything else.
So you're writing for the ear more than the eye.
Always.
That's the case.
And I think that's one of the problems with poetry.
It began with Gutenberg.
The printed page became the repository of the words.
There are blessings and curses to that, I guess, is what you're saying.
Yes, of course it was a great thing, and thank God for it, Mr. Gutenberg.
But the page then became the locale of poetry.
You've actually called it the cold bed, I think, as a metaphor you use.
And eventually, with the second I call retreat into the academy, the separation of poetry from the general population has become critical and grievous.
Of course, Shakespeare didn't go to university either.
No, no.
Even his good friend Ben Johnson said, well, a little Latin and less Greek or whatever.
They made fun of him.
And they tried to deny him the right to creation.
That's right.
Because how could anyone so brilliant have not gone to university here?
But it's really absurd.
How do you feel about this, where music is played at these poetry performances, where there's a juxtaposition?
I'm rather resistant to it because I feel that poetry has its own music.
It's a very subtle, wonderfully variable, and profound.
And it doesn't require any specification from without.
So you certainly wouldn't think of poetry as lyrics.
which is what it would be, I suppose, to music.
A libretto, so to speak.
The human voice is an instrument, then, when it comes to poetry.
It certainly is.
A musical instrument.
Of course, I began.
My first art was music.
You said that people today do not seem to have a sense of rhythm, though.
Were you talking about...
more recent poetry.
Yes.
Do you find that changing now?
Well, it's hard to see it or to define it, but let me say this.
The reason I said that was because
because my experience in teaching poetry was when I found that my students really did not know how to read poetry, and did not realize that we are a language of strong stresses and then weak syllables, and that
The music of poetry is dependent on the variation of that pulsing of the sound.
This is the art of poetry, really, is to manage, to control the flow of the stresses and the slacks.
and to compound them into a variable flow of language.
I know your own record is saying that poetry written at certain points in your life is completed work and speaks for that time of your life.
Of course.
I mean, Wordsworth went back and rewrote some of his poetry very badly, I think, in that case.
Completed work should be completed work.
You said that.
But do you ever, when you're giving readings like you did last night, as you're doing a poem, are you ever tempted to tinker with it as you're reading it?
Oh, I have tinkered with those poems a hundred times before the reading.
So I'm not likely to start doing it.
Do you ever feel anything?
Yeah, sometimes...
reading a poem I learn that there is something wrong with its rhythmic flow because I find difficulty reading it with the right emphasis and then I go back to it and with the advantage of
speaking it loud over and over again, I find a way of praising it that is natural for the human voice and gives the proper emphasis.
There's certainly poetry that endures for the generations and other examples that disappear.
What is it, do you think, you're a student of poetry, you've taught literature?
What do you think the best poems have that allow them to resonate beyond the lifetime of the artist?
Well, I think that Keats maybe defined it when he spoke of poetry as being true to feeling.
The sense that it comes out of human impulses that are not lying, that are telling the truth about the human condition.
I think that above all is what people respond to.
The poetry that sounds
as though it were a manufactured thing in which you are more conscious of the technique than of the person who has written the poem or the thing being said is, I think, the
characteristic of a poetry that is no longer capable of steering human responses.
I am bothered by the water.
It is a distraction.
You don't call it a foreword.
No, I say instead of a foreword.
But it really is a very, very eloquent statement, I think.
Oh, I've read it very, very carefully.
Yeah, well, it's a distillation of things I've been thinking about and writing about for years.
I'm interested, and it does speak quite eloquently, which is why I really haven't asked you to comment on it.
It's there for me to see.
I am interested, though, in a further exploration, though, of poetry, your sense of poetry, as mythology, which you do stand in there.
I think that's my central theme.
And that's...
Has that always been your sense of the... I mean, you have certainly been... Well, I think it became manifest to me after my first book, when I tried to find a direction,
a path that I could take as a person, as a poet.
And I began to think of my life in terms of what I was seeking for.
In other words, what is my quest?
The moment I asked that question,
I realized that I was speaking in mythological terms.
And how do you define mythology, by the way?
Not, I mean, in the classical sense?
Well, I'm using it in very broad, broad terms.
I feel that, well, as I define it in those remarks,
I say that poetry is ultimately mythology, the telling of the stories of the soul, in its passage through the valley of this life.
You see, that's certainly a mythological concept.
And I had to find that, that is to say, it's adventure in time and history.
I'm interested also that you have an index in this book.
Yes.
That's quite unusual for a volume of poetry, isn't it?
Well, this is a collection over a good span of years, and I like the idea that you... I do, too.
I really... I insisted on it.
Did you?
Yes, my publisher was...
I had not thought of it.
This is my new publisher, incidentally, so we're getting acquainted with each other.
And I like your writing, by the way.
Well, I'm so happy to have left Little Brown that I felt terribly unhappy.
Well, they're time-life.
They're time-life now.
I never even had an editor there, and nobody who cares.
But they were very tough in...
Letting me go, because they insisted that I could not leave unless I bought my rights.
Isn't that terrible?
And did you have to do that?
I paid a fantastic sum just to get out.
It was that uncomfortable.
It was that uncomfortable for you being with them.
Well, it certainly made me unhappy.
Well, I love Norton.
Well, they care.
It's an employee-owned company.
They own the company, and they have a sense of literature.
They care.
I mean, they don't publish a frivolous book.
There's not a single book that comes out of their list that's a frivolous book.
Every book is an attempt to do a good book well.
You don't find books on their list that are in there to bring up the growth, so to speak.
Even Patrick O'Brien, who has his following as a genre writer, that's serious literature, in my view.
I mean, it's entertaining, but the man really does write about, you know, a tradition that...
Anyway, congratulations.
And it is beautiful.
So, when you say an editor, of course, what does an editor offer to a poet?
Is it more or less shepherding you?
In my case, it's sympathy.
Encouragement.
A sense of pleasure in the association.
I've never had an editor who...
ever edited any of my poems.
So that isn't what I'm looking for.
But you're looking for somebody who can shepherd you through the process of... And take care of details that... Help you get the right desk jacket.
Oh, well, we... This is largely my doing.
And because my editor, Carol Hugsmith, really was happy to...
have me under her wing.
She went out and got a, I think, the best designer of poetry books around, Tree Swenson.
The first time they'd ever hired Tree to do a book for them.
And, yeah, that's the kind of thing you want from her.
It's wonderful, and I'm thrilled to have it.
In the Moyers interview, I think, and elsewhere, you've also stated that come about the age of 50, a poet has pretty much covered the terrain, the visible terrain.
Yes.
Then he has to explore.
But you've had four years of exploration since then.
Has it been difficult for you to discover new veins?
Well, when you're young...
Poems come to you unannounced.
You know, they're delivered at your doorstep every morning, like the daily news.
But when you're at my age, poems are...
buried under the debris of the life.
And you have to dig for them.
When you say the debris, you mean just the years?
All the mess, all the increment, all the waste.
Are you searching, however, for... All the incidents.
What is vital?
What is important to you?
What pertains to your deepest mythic self?
That's something.
That's why I don't write occasional poems, because they're only a distraction as far as I'm concerned.
You meant you used the phrase, poems come to you.
Is that a fair description of the creative process?
Do poems come to you?
Do you visualize them, see them, feel them?
Well, what I just said was that in one's youth poems... I understand.
I guess I'm trying to get on to, if you can articulate
Because it's very difficult, the creative process for you, where these things come from, where these wonderful things come from, faithful things.
But you understand what I'm driving at.
But there is a difference, you see, between these stages.
What I'm trying to say is that in one's early years, poems do come to you.
They're delivered to you.
They're...
because you are that kind of person, because you are open to experience, because you love language, because you feel there's something you want to say.
And everything is fresh and exciting and wonderful and strange, mysterious in one's youth, and one's in love, and that, you see?
Eliot said something once in one of his essays, that in one's youth, poetry is a glandular process.
Very good.
He didn't say it quite like that, but that was... Right, I got the point.
Hormonal, to be sure.
Yeah.
Well, what does Prospero's daughter say?
Brave new world.
And he says, "'Tis new to thee."
I mean, that's his rejoinder in, "'Tis new to thee."
And he's speaking from his side of the line.
Do you think in imagery, do images populate your conscious thoughts?
I think in images...
But my poems often begin with rhythms.
Really?
Rhythms that attach themselves to images.
That's interesting.
And I can tell when the process is going astray, because there's a separation there.
But once I find the rhythm, I can mount on it.
Are the themes that you explore, are they mindfully explored?
Because there are certainly themes that I think we can trace through the body of your work.
Most of the themes that I explore these days are
are not in my conscious life at all.
That's why I said I have to dig for them, because they're under the threshold of consciousness.
They belong to deep memory, to lost memory often.
And the process has to do with finding what it is.
What is stirring down there that wants to get out?
How do you catalyze this process?
How do you stir the part?
Well, most of my poems come to me in stages when
I'm half asleep and half awake when there are no inhibitions and when the unconscious life has an opportunity to emerge.
Often poems come to me in dreams.
You're anticipating my next question.
Yeah.
Some of the poems that I feel closest to are really out of dreams.
Well, Quinnipoxet, I think, is an example.
Quinnipoxet is... Basically, I think, is entirely derived from... Yes, the whole poem came to me.
Not in language, but in images.
Wow.
In one dream or a sequence?
In one dream.
In one dream, yes.
So you woke up with this concept, I guess we would have to call it at that point.
Another poem of mine, and one of my favorites, The Layers.
I don't know if you know that poem.
And the central passage in that poem are these words, Live in the layers, not on the litter.
That came to me in a dream.
I woke and I wrote it down immediately.
It was written out to me as though to say, don't forget it.
And I find if you do have things in your sleep or you wake up, if you don't write them down, they are gone forever.
Do you ever wake up with solutions to problems that have been perplexing you?
as opposed to... Yes.
It has happened.
I don't think it's an infallible process.
Sometimes.
But on occasion, yes.
But you can't... Is there any way to prepare yourself for the process?
I mean, do you go into a room?
Do you garden?
Do you have a good night's sleep?
Gardening is, for me, one...
I think of gardening as a meditation, an opportunity for meditation, while I'm working around the plants, while I'm weeding or killing or whatnot.
That's what's going on in my head, while my hands are busy with toil.
So it's never possible for you to...
entirely immerse yourself in the tilling or the planting or the weeding and all these things?
Well, sometimes one loses oneself in that, too.
But I've also read a wonderful quote where you actually, I mean, you see gardening and planting as an extension of what you're doing as a poet and what your function is.
I think of gardening, too, in mythic terms.
As I've said,
in several interviews when asked about gardening, that to me it is the process of death and resurrection.
And one is instrumental in the resurrection process.
That's a wonderful, exhilarating thought.
And your garden, of course, is for beauty.
It's not for the table, so to speak.
Are you familiar with the Celia Thaxter book?
Oh, yes, of course.
And with the Hasselman.
I have a first edition of that.
My garden, in a way, I hadn't mined.
It's about the same proportions as her garden.
Really?
And I, as a matter of fact, I reviewed the Celia Thaxter book for the times as I remember.
Yes.
But, well, in the New Yorker piece, I talk a bit about my garden and the theory behind it.
So you can get it from there.
Okay, good.
I find it interesting also that you worked briefly with the Worcester Telegram.
Yes.
I think you were, you did some literary things, is that well?
Yes, for the Sunday section.
Which was my, which was my later years.
I did real literary stuff that no longer would be tolerated in a paper.
I did, for example, a whole series of parodies, really, of the style of contemporary writers at that period.
That's great.
Sherwood Anderson, I remember, D.H.
Lawrence, Joyce.
Were they signed?
Did I?
I might look them up on microfilm.
I don't know how good they were.
I was in my early 20s when I was doing that.
When you were in your early 20s, did you see yourself then?
That would have been about 1925, I guess, or so.
Your first volume of published poetry is 1930.
Was there some epiphanous moment where you said, I'm a poet?
Oh, I thought of that long before.
Even in my early teens, yeah.
So it was something that you... I have a note in this volume attached to the testing tree, which I think is the central poem of my early years.
And I tell about...
roaming through the woods behind our house there.
Big, open, dense woods.
Not open there, but long stretches of wood.
And I played this game that I invented, throwing stones at a... There was a big white oak, the central tree in that whole forest.
And if I hit the trunk once,
Let's see how that went.
If I hit the trunk once, somebody would love me.
And if I hit it twice out of my three throws, I would be a poet.
And if I hit all three times, I would never die.
That was when I was maybe 12 years old.
Did you recognize this then as poetry?
as something stirring, certainly.
Yeah, well, I was so excited.
And I did this every day after school.
And you also... And I got awfully proficient at that.
I never missed.
And you used to enjoy the feel of words, I guess, saying them aloud.
And I still think of those.
See, I picked those stones very carefully.
That's what I did on my way home from school.
I picked smooth, like eggs, you know, stones that you could throw accurately.
And I kept them in my pocket.
And still, when I'm writing a poem, I often feel as though I'm holding those stones in my hand.
Is there a tactile relationship between you and the poem?
Yeah.
Touch is very important.
But in the creation of the poem itself.
It really does have to pass through your hand to the paper.
Oh, yes.
That's why I write by hand.
Always stop by pause.
A pencil or a pencil?
I write... Well, I usually start with a pencil so I can... Maybe fool around with it a little bit.
Then I move to a pen, and gradually I move to a manual typewriter.
How you doing?
And that's as far as I go.
Have you ever toyed with a computer?
Yes, but not successfully.
I feel too remote.
I lack that bodily...
touch that I need for poetry.
So there is a tactile element, very definitely.
Very much so.
That's wonderful.
You know, I have a daughter who's 13, and if you say to her, Nicole, write a haiku or something, she has this feel.
But I feel that in school, they do nothing to encourage a child to love poetry.
Yeah.
The way even it was in my time, and certainly in your time.
That goes back to your earlier question about poetry in our culture.
One of the miserable failures of our society is the education system, and its abandonment of poetry and the fact
making poetries torture and separating the child who has a natural poetic impulse from delight in the word.
There's no understanding that if they would only build on nursery rhymes, counting rhymes, that's the basis of the poem.
Every child loves those.
They do.
They love them.
Yeah.
Children love poetry.
And they have a receptivity to it, I think, as well.
And then it's killed off in the schools.
And I wonder what's occasioned that.
Is it an arrogance on the part of... It's ignorance.
Or is it a response to this mass media culture and television and rock music?
But so many of the teachers in the school system have no...
feeling for poetry.
How can they teach it?
So, you're here, but you certainly are hopeful for poetry.
Well, I think there is a simmering going on.
There is a, on the outer edges
There is a lot of excitement about it.
It even goes into rap.
It's amazing.
And slam, grand slams and those things.
It doesn't matter whether they're good or bad.
You don't judge them academically.
But it's a demonstration of the vitality of it.
It will not die.
Now you're 90 years old.
Yes.
And do you foresee, what do you see in the, I mean, the arc of your career is still, it's still a work in progress, isn't it?
Amazingly so, even to me.
See, I don't think of myself as, yes, the calendar says 90, but I don't feel 90.
My companions are young people.
poets, young poets largely, young painters and so forth.
That's the world that I really live in.
And, you know, I felt yesterday there was a reception at the house I was raised in, in Worcester, by the present occupants of that house, the stockpiles.
who have sort of adopted me, and who say I still live there.
And, in fact, they have a room devoted to me.
Do you remember it very well?
As your memory of it was very clear?
Of that house?
Yeah.
Yes.
But they've restored it.
They've restored it to its original condition, actually.
They're wonderful people.
They're non-literary.
They're working people.
But they really love me, and then the fact that I lived in that house means so much to them.
It's an extraordinary thing, and that shows you how poetry does mean something to non-literary people as well, if they are immersed in it, if they can get the sense of it.
When you see your room as it was,
80 years ago?
Does this evoke anything for you?
Well, my feeling was when I crossed the threshold of that house, I was 12 years old again.
Really?
Yes.
All the rush of memories came back.
And this was just yesterday?
Yes, yesterday.
And this is the first time you've been back?
No.
On my 80th,
Anniversary is the first time.
It's every summer?
It's the first time.
Wow.
And I've been back, well, I think I've been there once, between.
But going into that house is going into my childhood.
It's... And all the years drop away from it.
Isn't that amazing?
That's...
In that corner was a green Morris chair that existed.
I mean, it was in the library.
Did your brief experience as a journalist bring anything to your vision, I guess, to the vision that's... I guess you do look at things in a very... The great thing I remember from my years of the telegram was
the motto on the wall.
I know it was there when you were there.
It probably didn't remove, but it said... Accuracy.
Accuracy.
It's gone now, but it was there when I first came in.
And once again, accuracy.
Which actually, I guess they attributed it to Booth, but it was really Joseph Phillips' line.
It was Joseph Phillips.
Yeah, it was Phillips' line.
I've never forgotten that.
It's a valid admonition, isn't it?
And I think even for a poet, accuracy of observation, accuracy of perception, that's something one has to insist on.
Well, that is a gift, isn't it?
It's a gift so much, but it is a lesson that has proved of value to you.
In a way, I think
The poets of today, by, for the most part, being unable to support themselves with their art, are liberated in many ways, aren't they?
They are more free, don't you think, to tell the truth with a captain?
Unfortunately, most poets who survive in this society survive as academics.
That's the refuge for the poet.
That's the support for the poet.
And that's the means of survival.
And I believe that though it's, there's a positive there, certainly, in that it makes survival possible.
it also has a deleterious influence.
In my own case, for example, I didn't start to teach until, I didn't dare think of teaching until 20 years after I graduated from college.
And then I was scared to death that I would become an academic.
And I never accepted tenure.
So I worked through a long career in the academy, teaching poetry, arts, and creative writing classes, but always on an annual contract.
There was, however, an instance early in your life where you offered a position, or you weren't offered a position, you were denied a position, I guess, because you're Jewish.
That was very early.
Well, that's what divorced me.
But, I mean, that must have had an influence.
Oh, certainly.
Oh, yeah.
That was a real crisis.
But maybe it helps shape the poet that became... When Harvard, a couple of years ago, gave me its Centennial Medal, I said that...
Though it was a terrible wound when I was rejected, it had been a great stroke of fortune on my part that I did not become acceptable in the academic world at that time.
One of these unseen blessings at the time, isn't it?
I won't take up too much of your time, because we've had a wonderful hour.
And I look forward to many more wonderful poems.
Poems are hard work.
I think that's an important thing to point out.
It's not something you can snap off, is it?
It's the most difficult.
It's the life.
But it cannot be the purpose of the life.
That's the other thing.
It has to be for the sake of the life.
When do you know it's done?
When it sounds right, when it feels right.
When it sounds right.
After I read it in public, then I know.
You can gauge the response?
Well, I can tell.
There are certain poems that I value and I know are right, but that I never read.
A poem that one reads, chooses to read,
is one that can be grasped immediately, that doesn't require elaborate introduction or explanation of any kind.
And that simply has such a flow of emotion, feeling, truth, whatever it is, that there it is.
Is reading in public, then, an element of the creative process for you?
part of the communication.
It's like the old bards who ridden the streets and at ceremonial occasions.
It's, poetry hasn't varied, I think.
In itself, it is society that has changed.
You know, it's true, when you think of writers, the greatest calling
if you're a writer, I guess.
I mean, you go up the ladder.
Every nonfiction writer like myself would like to do a novel.
Then you talk to the novelists, they would all like to be a poet.
Look at Updike, for instance.
I mean, he craves recognition as a poet.
I know, I know.
And he's a wonderful short story writer and a fine novelist.
But he is very deftly.
Well, he understands poetry technically.
Technically, he writes very good poems.
They understand the poetic medium, but obviously, he is not a poet in his imagination.
He's a wonderful fiction writer.
Is it?
And I won't make any references to Uptek in this book.
Naturally.
But is it a gift, then?
Something that you can't...
It's a gift, but maybe everybody has a portion of that gift.
But some have it.
Often, I think, the gift is there.
I see it in so many young persons.
But it is stifled.
Sometimes,
by, simply by the education system, sometimes by the circumstances of life.
One has to yearn for something more than what the day gives you in order to become a poet.
That's a wonderful quote to put on, I think.
Could you... Okay, we're back on again.
It occurred to me, just as I was reading last night, that in terms of my statement about poetry being ultimately mythology, that in my own case, the perception began when I realized that my poetry was inseparable from
the quest for the father.
And that led eventually to my other quest, the quest for a community.
And that really is the core, I think, of the poetic impulse in me as it persists and is still there.
because I'll never find that shining city that I dream about.
I think that also relates to your going into the house.
Yes.
And going, shooting back over the threshold at 12 years old, isn't it?
Yeah, yeah.
It's all related, isn't it?
Yeah.
Okay.